# COP4710-Project
ACM Job Posting
The application that our group presented is a job portal. Essentially, there are two views a user can have while using the application. One view is as a company representative, and the other is as a student. The application is specific to computer science related majors at the Florida State university. The application allows for a expedited process for employers and students to get in contact with each other. The company representative has the ability to submit, and maintain, job postings and do searches for students based off of skills. In addition, the company representative is able to download any resumes or cover letters that were uploaded by the students. On the student side, one is able to upload cover letters and resumes (the application has several guidelines to this process, this will be gone into more depth later). A student is also able to search for job postings and pull up the contact information for the company representative that posted it. Finally, both the student and the company representative have the ability to maintain a profile with information that help sustain the searching ability. While this is just a brief overview of the application as a whole, it should give enough background knowledge to proceed to more advanced explanations.
The decision to choose this application.
The reasoning behind the creation of the application began at an Open Source Software Group (a sub-group of FSU’s ACM chapter) during the Spring 2018 semester. It was discussed that ACM was in need of a way for company representatives to have the capability of having access to the resumes of Computer Science students. What was proposed was the use of a Resume Database. At that point in time, ACM simply had a zip file of the resume files. Understandably it could be frustrating as a company representative to have been given this zip file without a method of quickly searching the files. While nothing was put into motion within the Open Source Software Group, we decided this would be the underlying reason for our term project. We chose this over other applications because there is a lot of practical use, as well as it was something that had the possibility of contributing to the Computer Science Department. Even though the application may never be used by ACM, it proposed a challenge that we as a group thought was perfect for the project. Not only did we encompass the concept of a Resume Database, we expanded upon it and came up with a Job Portal.
The key components of the application.
There were two major components that our application consisted of. The first being the MySQL database that held all of the data used. This was hosted on a server provided by the Computer Science Department. The second was the ww2 server in the Computer Science Department, which we got access to by the Systems Group. These two components simply scratch the surface of the application but without them, or the interaction between them, our application would not exist.
Database Details
Before going into detail about the design of the database, it is important to familiarize with the different tables and attributes in the database and the relationships of the entities. Included below are the E-R model and relational model.
E-R Model:

Relational Model:
Note: The primary keys are underlined and the foreign keys are italicized/bold.
 
Student(fsuID, Major, ID, GPA, Year, isGrad)
User(ID, Firstname, Lastname, Psswrd, isStdnt)
CompanyRep(repID, ID, CompanyName, Email, URL)
UserLog(ID, Lastlogon, Acctmade)
StudentExperience(fsuID, Resume, Cover Letter)
StudentSkillSets(fsuID, skillid, Explvl)
Skills(Skillid, Skillname)
JobPosting(jobID, repID, CompanyName, DatePosted, Startdate, POSname,
Type, Description, Salary, Country, State, City)
JobSkillSet(jobID, skillid, Explvl)
 
 
The tables in the database.
        	There are six tables in the database. First is the User table which holds the essential information to identify each user. The UserLog table holds the data for when a user first logged on and when the last time the logged on was. Then there are the Student and CompanyRep tables, these hold more detailed information for the two types of users of the application. The StudentExperience table holds the paths for the resumes and cover letters for each student. The Skills table holds the benchmark skills provided by us. The StudentSkillSets and JobSkillSet tables hold skills from the Skills tables that a student has chosen for themselves and a company representative has chosen for the job posting. Lastly is the JobPosting table, which hold the most information out of all the tables. It provides the necessary information that a company needs to advertise a position.
The database design.
When it came to designing our database, there were several factors we knew had to be accounted for. The first being, minimizing any redundancy of information in the database. There are two entities that hold the whole data base together, these being the User and JobPosting tables. If done properly, we knew that the whole application could be controlled with the id(User) and jobID(JobPosting) attributes. By doing so, we were able to meet the requirement of significantly reducing redundancy of information in the tables. The id(User) attribute allowed us to be able to link the tables together and not have to be repetitive with information like emails, names, and various information associated with a user. To add to that, since the JobPosting table held so much information, we needed a way to link the Company Representative and their job postings. So, by simply having the id(User) of a user, we can trace all the way to a job posting. As well as, if we have a jobID(JobPosting) we can trace all the way back to a id(User). In the database we make great use of foreign keys constraints to ensure that references to tables can only happen if there is a corresponding row that exists.
Moving on, we used a Student and a CompanyRep table to differentiate between the type of users. A record in the CompanyRep table is identified using the primary key pair id(User) and repID(CompanyRep). We used a similar primary key pair with the Student table except we made use of the FSUid instead of the repID(CompanyRep), since it was already unique to the set of users classified as students. Another entity we knew was essential to the application was the Skill table. There are several reasons as to why this table holds importance. Primarily, we wanted to allow for students to search for job postings and company reps to search for students. We found this search process could be streamlined through the use of skill attributes. So, a company representative could search for students by the different skills the student lists as being familiar with. Similarly, a student could search for a job posting by the skills that a company representative lists as job requirements. However, there was an issue with this aspiration. How could the application handle all the different skills that users type in? For example, one user could type, ‘C++’ and another could type, ‘C++ language’. The two entries are spelled differently but mean the same thing. To get around this a simple fix was implemented, a benchmarked skill set. Meaning the application will provide the user with a list of skills to choose from. Now the ability to have a quick and efficient search is achieved. From here we simply divided the skills selected by users into two tables, StudentSkillSets and JobSkillSet. The StudentSkillSets has a primary key pair of Skillid(Skills) and fsuID(Student) and the JobSkillSet has a primary key pair consisting of Skillid(Skills) and jobID(JobPosting). So now when a search is done, the skill is matched to a skill ID in the Skills tables and then the corresponding ID to either the job posting or student, depending on the search.
The remaining components are the UserLog and StudentExperience tables. The User Log is fairly self-explanatory, it holds the data for when a user first logs on and when they last logged on. This table proved handy because it showed when a user was inactive for an extended amount of time. The Student Experience table simply holds the path for the file (Resume or Cover Letter) the student uploads. This was very useful when it came time to access the files belonging to the student in the file system.
Accommodating Functional Dependencies.
        	When it came to any functional dependencies in the database, we made sure to include a foreign key that would allow us to be able to identify and match any entry into the functional dependency with an entry from a parent table. As stated above, we are able to fully navigate the database with the use of a few select attributes. However because there are tables specific to the two types of users, the database is only in 3NF because not all key attributes in the tables are superkeys.
Functionality Details
        	For the application there are several basic functions and advanced functions that work in unison. We found success in selecting advanced functions and then surrounding them with basic functions. First, we started with a login system. A user has the option to create an account or sign in. When the user creates an account, this is where they specify if they are a student. There is also a two-step verification system that requires the user to respond to a link provided in an email. We take the login credentials and then store them in the database as well and prepare a webpage corresponding to if they selected the field for being a student. Then we incorporated a profile system.
Once the user is logged in, they have several options to choose from and the set of options is dependent of if they are a company representative or a student. Here is a great example of surrounding advanced features with basic features. For the student, a filesystem was implemented to allow them to upload resumes and cover letters. As well as a search system that allows the students to search the jobs under certain criteria (skills, job type, and a JobID). Rounding it off with a feature to modify a profile. This is done by simply updating the database with the information provided.  
From the company representative perspective, you are able to initially manage job postings; meaning that there is the ability create, view, modify and delete job postings. Each ability will either select, insert, update, or delete from the tables in the database. Again, using basic functions to surround and makeup the advanced features. Next, the company representative can search for students in a similar manner as students searching for job postings. Not only is the student information presented, but this is where company representatives can download the resumes and cover letters uploaded by the students. And finally, the ability to modify the profile information was incorporated for the company representatives as well.
Implementation Details
        	Initially it was fairly obvious that if the application was to be implemented on the web server provide by the systems group, the use of HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and PHP was going to be absolutely needed. The application is primarily built from PHP and uses HTML to simply output the data and format of the different webpages. A script was used to connect to the database, so every time any query was to be taken place the script was used. Something else that was taken into consideration was SQL injection, so the ‘mysqli’ method was used throughout. When a user logs into the application, a session is started which allowed for the handy use of session variables. As well as it protected the application from anyone just going to one of the pages without being logged in.
Since PHP was used so extensively, the implementation was able to be seamless from the login screen and allowed for a dynamic website. To elaborate, the user only has to enter information, like their credentials, at the login screen. Using PHP we were able to store the user ID in a session variable and at any point in the application the users information can be modified or queried without them having to enter information to identify them. Essentially, the webpage can be unique to each user because their information is different than the others.
